I spoke the other day of the colossal military disaster which occurred
when the French High Command failed to withdraw the northern Armies
from Belgium at the moment when they knew that the French front was
decisively broken at Sedan and on the Meuse. This delay entailed the
loss of fifteen or sixteen French divisions and threw out of action
for the critical period the whole of the British Expeditionary
Force. Our Army and 120,000 French troops were indeed rescued by the
British Navy from Dunkirk but only with the loss of their cannon,
vehicles and modern equipment. This loss inevitably took some weeks to
repair, and in the first two of those weeks the battle in France has
been lost. When we consider the heroic resistance made by the French
Army against heavy odds in this battle, the enormous losses inflicted
upon the enemy and the evident exhaustion of the enemy, it may well be
the thought that these 25 divisions of the best-trained and
best-equipped troops might have turned the scale. However, General
Weygand had to fight without them. Only three British divisions or
their equivalent were able to stand in the line with their French
comrades. They have suffered severely, but they have fought well. We
sent every man we could to France as fast as we could re-equip and
transport their formations.

I am not reciting these facts for the purpose of recrimination. That I
judge to be utterly futile and even harmful. We cannot afford it. I
recite them in order to explain why it was we did not have, as we
could have had, between twelve and fourteen British divisions fighting
in the line in this great battle instead of only three. Now I put all
this aside. I put it on the shelf, from which the historians, when
they have time, will select their documents to tell their stories. We
have to think of the future and not of the past. This also applies in
a small way to our own affairs at home. There are many who would hold
an inquest in the House of Commons on the conduct of the
Governments--and of Parliaments, for they are in it, too--during the
years which led up to this catastrophe. They seek to indict those who
were responsible for the guidance of our affairs. This also would be a
foolish and pernicious process. There are too many in it. Let each man
search his conscience and search his speeches. I frequently search
mine.

Of this I am quite sure, that if we open a quarrel between the past
and the present, we shall find that we have lost the
future. Therefore, I cannot accept the drawing of any distinctions
between members of the present Government. It was formed at a moment
of crisis in order to unite all the Parties and all sections of
opinion. It has received the almost unanimous support of both Houses
of Parliament. Its members are going to stand together, and, subject
to the authority of the House of Commons, we are going to govern the
country and fight the war. It is absolutely necessary at a time like
this that every Minister who tries each day to do his duty shall be
respected; and their subordinates must know that their chiefs are not
threatened men, men who are here today and gone tomorrow, but that
their directions must be punctually and faithfully obeyed. Without
this concentrated power we cannot face what lies before us. I should
not think it would be very advantageous for the House to prolong this
debate this afternoon under conditions of public stress. Many facts
are not clear that will be clear in a short time. We are to have a
secret session on Thursday, and I should think that would be a better
opportunity for the many earnest expressions of opinion which members
will desire to make and for the House to discuss vital matters without
having everything read the next morning by our dangerous foes.

The disastrous military events which have happened during the past
fortnight have not come to me with any sense of surprise. Indeed, I
indicated a fortnight ago as clearly as I could to the House that the
worst possibilities were open; and I made it perfectly clear then that
whatever happened in France would make no difference to the resolve of
Britain and the British Empire to fight on, if necessary for years, if
necessary alone.

During the last few days we have successfully brought off the great
majority of the troops we had on the line of communication in France;
and seven-eighths of the troops we have sent to France since the
beginning of the war--that is to say, about 350,000 out of 400,000
men--are safely back in this country. Others are still fighting with
the French, and fighting with considerable success in their local
encounters against the enemy. We have also brought back a great mass
of stores, rifles and munitions of all kinds which had been
accumulated in France during the last nine months.

We have, therefore, in this Island today a very large and powerful
military force. This force comprises all our best-trained and our
finest troops, including scores of thousands of those who have already
measured their quality against the Germans and found themselves at no
disadvantage. We have under arms at the present time in this Island
over a million and a quarter men. Behind these we have the Local
Defense Volunteers, numbering half a million, only a portion of whom,
however, are yet armed with rifles or other firearms. We have
incorporated into our Defense Forces every man for whom we have a
weapon. We expect very large additions to our weapons in the near
future, and in preparation for this we intend forthwith to call up,
drill and train further large numbers. Those who are not called up, or
else are employed during the vast business of munitions production in
all its branches--and their ramifications are innumerable--will serve
their country best by remaining at their ordinary work until they
receive their summons. We have also over here Dominions armies. The
Canadians had actually landed in France, but have now been safely
withdrawn, much disappointed, but in perfect order, with all their
artillery and equipment. And these very high-class forces from the
Dominions will now take part in the defense of the Mother Country.

Lest the account which I have given of these large forces should raise
the question: Why did they not take part in the great battle in
France? I must make it clear that, apart from the divisions training
and organizing at home, only twelve divisions were equipped to fight
upon a scale which justified their being sent abroad. And this was
fully up to the number which the French had been led to expect would
be available in France at the ninth month of the war. The rest of our
forces at home have a fighting value for home defense which will, of
course, steadily increase every week that passes. Thus, the invasion
of Great Britain would at this time require the transportation across
the sea of hostile armies on a very large scale, and after they had
been so transported they would have to be continually maintained with
all the masses of munitions and supplies which are required for
continuous battle--as continuous battle it will surely be.

Here is where we come to the Navy--and after all, we have a Navy. Some
people seem to forget that we have a Navy. We must remind them. For
the last thirty years I have been concerned in discussions about the
possibilities of oversea invasion, and I took the responsibility on
behalf of the Admiralty, at the beginning of the last war, of allowing
all regular troops to be sent out of the country. That was a very
serious step to take, because our Territorials had only just been
called up and were quite untrained. Therefore, this Island was for
several months particularly denuded of fighting troops. The Admiralty
had confidence at that time in their ability to prevent a mass
invasion even though at that time the Germans had a magnificent battle
fleet in the proportion of 10 to 16, even though they were capable of
fighting a general engagement every day and any day, whereas now they
have only a couple of heavy ships worth speaking of--the Scharnhorst
and the Gneisenau. We are also told that the Italian Navy is to come
out and gain sea superiority in these waters. If they seriously intend
it, I shall only say that we shall be delighted to offer Signor
Mussolini a free and safeguarded passage through the Strait of
Gibraltar in order that he may play the part to which he
aspires. There is a general curiosity in the British Fleet to find out
whether the Italians are up to the level they were at in the last war
or whether they have fallen off at all.

Therefore, it seems to me that as far as sea-borne invasion on a great
scale is concerned, we are far more capable of meeting it today than
we were at many periods in the last war and during the early months of
this war, before our other troops were trained, and while the
B.E.F. had proceeded abroad. Now, the Navy have never pretended to be
able to prevent raids by bodies of 5,000 or 10,000 men flung suddenly
across and thrown ashore at several points on the coast some dark
night or foggy morning. The efficacy of sea power, especially under
modern conditions, depends upon the invading force being of large
size; It has to be of large size, in view of our military strength, to
be of any use. If it is of large size, then the Navy have something
they can find and meet and, as it were, bite on. Now, we must remember
that even five divisions, however lightly equipped, would require 200
to 250 ships, and with modern air reconnaissance and photography it
would not be easy to collect such an armada, marshal it, and conduct
it across the sea without any powerful naval forces to escort it; and
there would be very great possibilities, to put it mildly, that this
armada would be intercepted long before it reached the coast, and all
the men drowned in the sea or, at the worst blown to pieces with their
equipment while they were trying to land. We also have a great system
of minefields, recently strongly reinforced, through which we alone
know the channels. If the enemy tries to sweep passages through these
minefields, it will be the task of the Navy to destroy the
mine-sweepers and any other forces employed to protect them. There
should be no difficulty in this, owing to our great superiority at
sea.

Those are the regular, well-tested, well-proved arguments on which we
have relied during many years in peace and war. But the question is
whether there are any new methods by which those solid assurances can
be circumvented. Odd as it may seem, some attention has been given to
this by the Admiralty, whose prime duty and responsibility is to
destroy any large sea-borne expedition before it reaches, or at the
moment when it reaches, these shores. It would not be a good thing for
me to go into details of this. It might suggest ideas to other people
which they have not thought of, and they would not be likely to give
us any of their ideas in exchange. All I will say is that untiring
vigilance and mind-searching must be devoted to the subject, because
the enemy is crafty and cunning and full of novel treacheries and
stratagems. The House may be assured that the utmost ingenuity is
being displayed and imagination is being evoked from large numbers of
competent officers, well-trained in tactics and thoroughly up to date,
to measure and counterwork novel possibilities. Untiring vigilance and
untiring searching of the mind is being, and must be, devoted to the
subject, because, remember, the enemy is crafty and there is no dirty
trick he will not do.

Some people will ask why, then, was it that the British Navy was not
able to prevent the movement of a large army from Germany into Norway
across the Skagerrak? But the conditions in the Channel and in the
North Sea are in no way like those which prevail in the Skagerrak. In
the Skagerrak, because of the distance, we could give no air support
to our surface ships, and consequently, lying as we did close to the
enemy's main air power, we were compelled to use only our
submarines. We could not enforce the decisive blockade or interruption
which is possible from surface vessels. Our submarines took a heavy
toll but could not, by themselves, prevent the invasion of Norway. In
the Channel and in the North Sea, on the other hand, our superior
naval surface forces, aided by our submarines, will operate with close
and effective air assistance.

This brings me, naturally, to the great question of invasion from the
air, and of the impending struggle between the British and German Air
Forces. It seems quite clear that no invasion on a scale beyond the
capacity of our land forces to crush speedily is likely to take place
from the air until our Air Force has been definitely overpowered. In
the meantime, there may be raids by parachute troops and attempted
descents of airborne soldiers. We should be able to give those gentry
a warm reception both in the air and on the ground, if they reach it
in any condition to continue the dispute. But the great question is:
Can we break Hitler's air weapon? Now, of course, it is a very great
pity that we have not got an Air Force at least equal to that of the
most powerful enemy within striking distance of these shores. But we
have a very powerful Air Force which has proved itself far superior in
quality, both in men and in many types of machine, to what we have met
so far in the numerous and fierce air battles which have been fought
with the Germans. In France, where we were at a considerable
disadvantage and lost many machines on the ground when they were
standing round the aerodromes, we were accustomed to inflict in the
air losses of as much as two and two-and-a-half to one. In the
fighting over Dunkirk, which was a sort of no-man's-land, we
undoubtedly beat the German Air Force, and gained the mastery of the
local air, inflicting here a loss of three or four to one day after
day. Anyone who looks at the photographs which were published a week
or so ago of the re-embarkation, showing the masses of troops
assembled on the beach and forming an ideal target for hours at a
time, must realize that this re-embarkation would not have been
possible unless the enemy had resigned all hope of recovering air
superiority at that time and at that place.

In the defense of this Island the advantages to the defenders will be
much greater than they were in the fighting around Dunkirk. We hope to
improve on the rate of three or four to one which was realized at
Dunkirk; and in addition all our injured machines and their crews
which get down safely--and, surprisingly, a very great many injured
machines and men do get down safely in modern air fighting--all of
these will fall, in an attack upon these Islands, on friendly soil and
live to fight another day; whereas all the injured enemy machines and
their complements will be total losses as far as the war is concerned.

During the great battle in France, we gave very powerful and
continuous aid to the French Army, both by fighters and bombers; but
in spite of every kind of pressure we never would allow the entire
metropolitan fighter strength of the Air Force to be consumed. This
decision was painful, but it was also right, because the fortunes of
the battle in France could not have been decisively affected even if
we had thrown in our entire fighter force. That battle was lost by the
unfortunate strategical opening, by the extraordinary and unforseen
power of the armored columns, and by the great preponderance of the
German Army in numbers. Our fighter Air Force might easily have been
exhausted as a mere accident in that great struggle, and then we
should have found ourselves at the present time in a very serious
plight. But as it is, I am happy to inform the House that our fighter
strength is stronger at the present time relatively to the Germans,
who have suffered terrible losses, than it has ever been; and
consequently we believe ourselves possessed of the capacity to
continue the war in the air under better conditions than we have ever
experienced before. I look forward confidently to the exploits of our
fighter pilots--these splendid men, this brilliant youth--who will
have the glory of saving their native land, their island home, and all
they love, from the most deadly of all attacks.

There remains, of course, the danger of bombing attacks, which will
certainly be made very soon upon us by the bomber forces of the
enemy. It is true that the German bomber force is superior in numbers
to ours; but we have a very large bomber force also, which we shall
use to strike at military targets in Germany without intermission. I
do not at all underrate the severity of the ordeal which lies before
us; but I believe our countrymen will show themselves capable of
standing up to it, like the brave men of Barcelona, and will be able
to stand up to it, and carry on in spite of it, at least as well as
any other people in the world. Much will depend upon this; every man
and every woman will have the chance to show the finest qualities of
their race, and render the highest service to their cause. For all of
us, at this time, whatever our sphere, our station, our occupation or
our duties, it will be a help to remember the famous lines:

He nothing common did or mean, Upon that memorable scene.

I have thought it right upon this occasion to give the House and the
country some indication of the solid, practical grounds upon which we
base our inflexible resolve to continue the war. There are a good many
people who say, 'Never mind. Win or lose, sink or swim, better die
than submit to tyranny--and such a tyranny.' And I do not dissociate
myself from them. But I can assure them that our professional advisers
of the three Services unitedly advise that we should carry on the war,
and that there are good and reasonable hopes of final victory. We have
fully informed and consulted all the self-governing Dominions, these
great communities far beyond the oceans who have been built up on our
laws and on our civilization, and who are absolutely free to choose
their course, but are absolutely devoted to the ancient Motherland,
and who feel themselves inspired by the same emotions which lead me to
stake our all upon duty and honor. We have fully consulted them, and I
have received from their Prime Ministers, Mr. Mackenzie King of
Canada, Mr. Menzies of Australia, Mr. Fraser of New Zealand, and
General Smuts of South Africa--that wonderful man, with his immense
profound mind, and his eye watching from a distance the whole panorama
of European affairs--I have received from all these eminent men, who
all have Governments behind them elected on wide franchises, who are
all there because they represent the will of their people, messages
couched in the most moving terms in which they endorse our decision to
fight on, and declare themselves ready to share our fortunes and to
persevere to the end. That is what we are going to do.

We may now ask ourselves: In what way has our position worsened since
the beginning of the war? It has worsened by the fact that the Germans
have conquered a large part of the coast line of Western Europe, and
many small countries have been overrun by them. This aggravates the
possibilities of air attack and adds to our naval preoccupations. It
in no way diminishes, but on the contrary definitely increases, the
power of our long-distance blockade. Similarly, the entrance of Italy
into the war increases the power of our long-distance blockade. We
have stopped the worst leak by that. We do not know whether military
resistance will come to an end in France or not, but should it do so,
then of course the Germans will be able to concentrate their forces,
both military and industrial, upon us. But for the reasons I have
given to the House these will not be found so easy to apply. If
invasion has become more imminent, as no doubt it has, we, being
relieved from the task of maintaining a large army in France, have far
larger and more efficient forces to meet it.

If Hitler can bring under his despotic control the industries of the
countries he has conquered, this will add greatly to his already vast
armament output. On the other hand, this will not happen immediately,
and we are now assured of immense, continuous and increasing support
in supplies and munitions of all kinds from the United States; and
especially of aeroplanes and pilots from the Dominions and across the
oceans coming from regions which are beyond the reach of enemy
bombers.

I do not see how any of these factors can operate to our detriment on
balance before the winter comes; and the winter will impose a strain
upon the Nazi regime, with almost all Europe writhing and starving
under its cruel heel, which, for all their ruthlessness, will run them
very hard. We must not forget that from the moment when we declared
war on the 3rd September it was always possible for Germany to turn
all her Air Force upon this country, together with any other devices
of invasion she might conceive, and that France could have done little
or nothing to prevent her doing so. We have, therefore, lived under
this danger, in principle and in a slightly modified form, during all
these months. In the meanwhile, however, we have enormously improved
our methods of defense, and we have learned what we had no right to
assume at the beginning, namely, that the individual aircraft and the
individual British pilot have a sure and definite
superiority. Therefore, in casting up this dread balance sheet and
contemplating our dangers with a disillusioned eye, I see great reason
for intense vigilance and exertion, but none whatever for panic or
despair.

During the first four years of the last war the Allies experienced
nothing but disaster and disappointment. That was our constant fear:
one blow after another, terrible losses, frightful dangers. Everything
miscarried. And yet at the end of those four years the morale of the
Allies was higher than that of the Germans, who had moved from one
aggressive triumph to another, and who stood everywhere triumphant
invaders of the lands into which they had broken. During that war we
repeatedly asked ourselves the question: 'How are we going to win?'
And no one was able ever to answer it with much precision, until at
the end, quite suddenly, quite unexpectedly, our terrible foe
collapsed before us, and we were so glutted with victory that in our
folly we threw it away.

We do not yet know what will happen in France or whether the French
resistance will be prolonged, both in France and in the French Empire
overseas. The French Government will be throwing away great
opportunities and casting adrift their future if they do not continue
the war in accordance with their treaty obligations, from which we
have not felt able to release them. The House will have read the
historic declaration in which, at the desire of many Frenchmen--and of
our own hearts--we have proclaimed our willingness at the darkest hour
in French history to conclude a union of common citizenship in this
struggle. However matters may go in France or with the French
Government, or other French Governments, we in this Island and in the
British Empire will never lose our sense of comradeship with the
French people. If we are now called upon to endure what they have been
suffering, we shall emulate their courage, and if final victory
rewards our toils they shall share the gains, aye, and freedom shall
be restored to all. We abate nothing of our just demands; not one jot
or tittle do we recede. Czechs, Poles, Norwegians, Dutch, Belgians
have joined their causes to our own. All these shall be restored.

What General Weygand called the Battle of France is over. I expect
that the Battle of Britain is about to begin. Upon this battle depends
the survival of Christian civilization. Upon it depends our own
British life, and the long continuity of our institutions and our
Empire. The whole fury and might of the enemy must very soon be turned
on us.

Hitler knows that he will have to break us in this Island or lose the
war. If we can stand up to him, all Europe may be free and the life of
the world may move forward into broad, sunlit uplands. But if we fail,
then the whole world, including the United States, including all that
we have known and cared for, will sink into the abyss of a new Dark
Age made more sinister, and perhaps more protracted, by the lights of
perverted science.

Let us therefore brace ourselves to our duties, and so bear ourselves
that if the British Empire and its Commonwealth last for a thousand
years, men will still say, 'This was their finest hour.'

Hitler knows that he will have to break us in this Island or lose the
war. If we can stand up to him, all Europe may be free and the life of
the world may move forward into broad, sunlit uplands. But if we fail,
then the whole world, including the United States, including all that
we have known and cared for, will sink into the abyss of a new Dark
Age made more sinister, and perhaps more protracted, by the lights of
perverted science.
